in a study of 152 young athletes most of
them had brain damage from small
repetitive hits to the head and it
really destroys a person's life that is
shocking news but medical professionals
don't take it seriously and the NFL
wanted me to present my findings but
they didn't believe me and so there was
a huge effort to really discredit me Dr
an mck is the world leading brain
scientist who runs the world's biggest
brain Bank she's revealing
groundbreaking research on the serious
life-threatening consequences of of
playing sport these injuries are
acceleration deceleration very rapidly
and twisting of the brain and that
phrases the nerve cells and then over
time the disease progresses and this
protein called to it stains Brown and it
starts spreading through the brain and
we have lots of evidence that this is
happening in contact sports but also in
military veterans domestic violence Etc
and it causes depression personality
changes aggressive and violent behaviors
or maybe the person takes their own life
look at Aaron Hernandez and Wyatt
ramwell 18 years old he was an American
football player and he videotaped
himself before taking his own life my
head is pretty messed up and damaged the
voices and demons in my head just
started to take over everything I wanted
to do it was his dying wish to donate
his brain yeah I saw multiple CTE
lesions in many parts of his brain
caused by playing tackle football for
several years yes and every time you see
it in a young person you just can't get
over it it's a lot few to carry there's
some days that are darker than others
but we're not where I'd like us to be
what do we do about this we have
to this has always blown my mind a
little bit 53% of you that listen to the
show regularly haven't yet subscribed to
the show so could I ask you for a favor
before we start if you like the show and
you like what we do here and you want to
support us the free simple way that you
can do just that is by hitting the
Subscribe button and my commitment to
you is if you do that then I'll do
everything in my power me and my team to
make sure that this is better you every
single week we'll listen to your
feedback we'll find the guests that you
want me to speak to and we'll continue
to do what we do thank you so
[Music]
much Dr
mck what is the mission that you're on
in with your life and your professional
Endeavors well my mission in life has
taken abrupt change about 17 years ago
when I first saw a CTE in the brain of a
football player and I realized that uh
that the play of football was associated
with a a chronic and Progressive neurod
degenerative disease so my first two
cases uh in football players were 45y
old men and I was stunned to see CTE in
their brains 45 is extremely young for a
neurod degenerative disease and then my
third case was actually an 18-year-old
where I saw uh the beginnings of CTE in
the brain of a high school player and
I've never looked back since then uh it
when you talk to the families and you
hear the tragedy that that they
experience the the heartache of of
living with these people who change
before their eyes their personality
changes their mood changes they become
people they don't recognize uh and then
they live through often an accidental
death or maybe the person takes their
own life and it's a result of of almost
a coincidence of seeing that those
changes in the brains of American
football players I I immediately just
wanted to eradicate this disease what is
CTE so CTE stands for chronic traumatic
incopy and it's a neurodegenerative
disease of the brain which means it over
time decades usually it gradually
gradually robs you of your ability to
think clearly or remember things and
ultimately you end up with dementia
what's interesting about CTE is that
there's a cause an environmental cause
it's triggered by trauma specifically
small repetitive hits to the Head the
kind that people don't even notice when
they're playing contact Sports some of
these hits result in concussion but
actually it's more importantly the
subconcussive or non-concussive hits
that happen routinely in the play of
football and very often in the play of
other contact sports like ice hockey
rugby and soccer um the disease starts
out as isolated areas of abnormality in
the brain sort of spots in the brain in
the cortex usually in the frontal loes
and then over time as the person ages
even if they stop playing the sport stop
getting hit in the head uh the disease
progresses the towel that's started very
focally in in very restricted area
starts spreading through the brain it it
invades the areas that are important for
memory and learning it takes over the
brain stem it causes Motor problems
memory problems cognitive problems and
it really destroys a person's life and
some of those Sports and lifestyle
choices that are likely to encourage CTE
you mentioned the NFL sort of American
football you mentioned soccer which is
heading the ball um fighting fighting in
ice hockey certainly boxing so boxing
UFC MMA yeah the military the military
is also uh at risk uh after blast injury
or combat related injuries also a very
high percentage of military veterans uh
played contact Sports it's is same
demographic so they have a combined risk
domestic violence domestic violence is
definitely uh one of the uh triggers for
CTE uh it it it may not be as risky may
not pose as great a risk as something
with very sustained uh head impacts like
football but certainly if the if the
domestic violence is longstanding and
repetitive over years yes with women uh
have been reported with uh CTE I didn't
realize the brain was so fragile it is
these injuries are acceleration
deceleration very rapidly and twisting
of the brain and the Brain stretches as
it's going in a linear Direction and it
twists uh as it's going in a rotational
Direction and that actually uh phras the
nerve cells they are actually twisted
and distorted and it also uh injures the
blood vessels the long these long
elements in the brain so we see vascular
injury usually to the small blood
vessels and we see damage to the nerve
cells so what you do do on a day-to-day
basis what have you been doing for the
last 17 years if I was to come and see
you at work what would I see and where
would I see you working so we have a a
lab it's a uh the neuropathology lab and
we specialize in we have several brain
Banks you would see me dissecting brains
photographing brains and then most
uh likely you'd see me looking under the
microscope at brains and how many brains
have you seen oh I was thinking about
that earlier I I I I think it's very
close to 10,000 at this point so take me
to that day that changed your career
where you got to look at that first
brain that had signs of CTE in it what
did you see who was that person and why
was that such a pivotal moment for you I
was studying Alzheimer's disease I'd
been looking at Alzheimer's disease
brains and we had a man that came into
the the bank in 2003 who was named Paul
Pender he was a boxer a famous boxer in
the Boston area and he twice fought uh
Sugar Ray Robinson for the world title
so he came in with a diagnosis of
Alzheimer's disease into our Alzheimer
bank and um everybody thought it was
Alzheimer's disease because he'd retired
from boxing some about 40 years before
he died and everyone felt well if this
were related to boxing it would have
shown up earlier so when I looked at
that brain it was very obvious right
from the minute I looked at it that it
was an Alzheimer's disease because
Alzheimer's has beta amid plaques you
have to have them to make the diagnosis
this guy had no betoid plaques but what
he did have was this protein called towo
and using our stains it stains Brown and
this tow was all over his brain and in
the most peculiar regions it was
circling around small blood vessels it
was it was clustered at the crevices of
the brains it was involving nuclei in
the brain that are not involved in in
Alzheimer's it was involving the
cerebellum it was the most curious
disease and I scientifically became
extremely interested in finding out more
about how boxing could promote this kind
of neurod
degeneration and then it was some five
years later that I had the opportunity
to look at a American football player's
brain so I looked at the first case John
Grimsley 45 when he died
and I looked at it and I I couldn't
believe my eyes I couldn't believe that
a 45-year-old man could have this amount
of towel in his brain could have this
amount of degeneration it just doesn't
happen that early neurogenerative
diseases are primly diseases of Aging so
70s 80s unless you maybe have a genetic
component it comes on in your 50s but 45
is extraordinarily early and I couldn't
let go of it it was it was it was
monumentally interesting from a
scientific point of view that that an
exposure to trauma could cause this kind
of brain damage and then it what was
really interesting as opposed to
Alzheimer's disease is because trauma
was causing it there was the possibility
we could map it from the earliest trauma
to its you know last manifestations then
there's the emotional component of
talking to the families and and just
wanting to be their Advocate I I
realized very quick
that if I didn't speak out for these
families who were experiencing this
tragedy this Devastation this death of
their loved one who had changed before
their eyes um nobody else was I've got
some of the brain scans of someone who
has advanced CTE here in front of me and
it is quite frankly horrific yeah versus
the normal brain on the left which we'll
put on the screen for everybody to see
and Link down below for anyone that's
just listening on audio but it I mean
the only way I can describe it is it
looks like the brain has died yeah it's
all shriveled have there been any
studies done to figure out how many
football players soccer players etc etc
people that are playing these sort of
high contact Sports have the early signs
of these neurodegenerative diseases
showing up already in their brain oh if
they're NFL players it's over
95% it varies you know it's 95% and up
uh the last last time we looked at
college players it was 90% 90% yes I WR
a St that said um a 2023 study found
that more than 40% of brains from
contact sport players who died before
age 30 had CTE which came out of Boston
University yeah that was our Study last
August and in that study we studied 152
athletes and we found like 63 p uh had
uh signs of CTE early CTE so about 41%
at CTE that is is shocking news that is
that is saying to me we have to address
this disease these are kids they they
had no reason for their lives to end so
early so we we have to address this even
if the risk is small for high school
players or college players which I don't
think is true I think for college it's
actually quite substantial uh we have to
address this to keep our kids safe most
people most parents want their kids to
live long productive sa lives and this
is a disease that cuts them down cuts
down their their their potential early
in life and a study done from your
University as well said that
345 out of the
376 former NFL players which is 92% who
were studied had CTE in their
brains and what how does this disease
impact that person's life because you
know these children that are playing
sports whether it's on soccer or rugby
or um American football right now
they're probably not seeing the symptoms
in their everyday life but you're
telling me that the symptoms will show
up potentially if they do develop CTE
what are those symptoms you've se you
spoke to the families you've seen the
loss of the you know we can see symptoms
quite early um we we have found uh you
know in that study of the 152 young
athletes they were all symptomatic and
those symptoms generally are depression
very common emotional libility uh
irritability impulsivity poor judgment
making poor choices uh there can be
aggressive and violent behaviors
physical and even verbal violence and a
short fuse so a small infraction causes
them to have sort of an exaggerated
hostile uh response and then you can
even develop memory loss and and and
cognitive change even in these young
athletes in general the symptoms develop
uh later maybe four years later a decade
later um and they generally show up
again as these behavioral and mood
symptoms a personality change uh and as
the person gets older they start to be
memory loss uh difficulty thinking
cognitive loss and then
ultimately uh Dementia in almost
everyone who has severe disease can you
give me some case studies that have
really stood out to you as it relates to
the symptoms showing up early but also
showing up in a really intense way yeah
I mean there was uh we we actually did a
deep dive into um several of the uh
players and families that were in that
uh
2023 uh paper about the young athletes
and um there's a very compelling video
on the New York Times website of an
18-year-old Wyatt Bramwell what he tells
you in this selftape he actually
videotaped himself before taking his own
life and it's a very tough tap to watch
hello so what this is this is me
explaining what's wrong with me um I've
been depressed for a long time my head
is pretty messed up and
damaged the voices and demons in my head
just started to take over everything I
wanted to
do I took a lot of hits through football
a lot of hits through football took a
lot of concussion and a lot of times I
never told anybody about how I was
feeling in my head after a hit you know
I just kind of kept playing which was
not smart on my end I know that Dad I
know you're capable of doing this and I
want you to do it after my funeral which
will be an open casket I want my brain
donated to be studied I I feel like
it'll be closure for me and it'll be
closure for you guys to know that maybe
why it suffered from brain damage maybe
that was the reason so do that for
yourself I would like that to be done I
want you all to be happy that I'm free
and then I can rest easy cuzz my life
for the past 4 years has been living
hell inside of my
head I love you and
[Music]
goodbye it's the same story over and
over with these with these young
athletes they there's something wrong
they're not thinking clearly they can't
really easily put their finger on it and
if they go to seek help a lot of times
the medical professionals don't take it
seriously or don't think it could
possibly be related to the playing of
football or other uh contact Sports and
so they're so they're dismissed the
symptoms are dismissed and and that also
contributes to their Despair and and
deep uh uh depression as you were saying
that I just pulled up an article
about
Wyatt and it is it is heartbreaking the
article says in July 2019 just months
after graduating from high school 18
years old he took his own life about a
year later researchers at your
University diagnosed him with Stage 2
CTE caused by playing tackle football
for several years so did you look at his
brain I did and what did you see I saw
multiple CTE lesions uh in many parts of
his brain you'd think I'd get you know
used to it but every time you see it in
a young person you just can't get over
it you just it it it it stops you in
your tracks it it it it just makes you
stop everything and and wonder why
aren't people doing more to prevent this
disease this we now have the knowledge
we just have to take
action Wyatt's mother suspects he knew
what he was doing when he took his own
life he shot himself in the heart
instead of the head Christy Bramwell his
mother said it was her son's dying wish
to donate his brain to CTE research and
the only way to diagnose the disease is
through an autopsy of the brain it's it
just breaks your heart he was desperate
he was desperate and he wanted he wanted
people to know if he did seek help I'm
not sure he did but if he had I don't
think anyone would have understood what
was causing it and this is the
disconnect we have lots of evidence that
this is happening in amateur sports
especially American football but other
sports as well and yet and this is a
disease that is entirely preventable if
I started
playing American football or some kind
of sport that involved a lot of sort of
head trauma when I was younger you know
I started playing soccer when I was gosh
I must have been 10 years old when I
started playing in a in a competitive
team and then I played up until I was
maybe sort of 18 roughly years old if I
carried on doing that at what age would
in your opinion if I was the average
player the first signs of this traumatic
brain injury the the CTE start to show
because I'm thinking about Premier
League football players in the UK soccer
players in the UK they often start at
five years old they play until maybe
they're 35 years old and then what we do
tend to see is we
see mental health issues yeah we often
see
alcoholism um a way to cope with their
mental health issues yeah and other
forms of compulsive behavior and I
wondered if there was a link at all in
and if it's if it's hand sh as soon as
their 40s and you know we definitely
have uh we have a Collegiate soccer
player with with CTE the first American
Collegiate uh first American case of CTE
in a woman uh we have uh we even have a
high school soccer player with early CTE
so what we don't know about soccer
because we have fewer uh brain donations
from soccer players we still haven't uh
developed the dose you know the years of
play versus CTE that we have developed
for these other sports um so you know
that is one of the studies that we're
hoping to do is study the brains of
soccer players maybe uh collaborate with
places like Brazil or the UK where
soccer is a is the predominant Sport and
if these people were to die you know uh
analyze their brain and that would
enable us to develop a a response a dose
response curve with the number of years
played and risk for CTE have you seen
the UFC I have not um it's like MMA it's
makes but it's brutal right it's brutal
um there's obviously also boxing when
you talking about CT I thought about the
term they used to say when people
retired from boxing or even when they
got later in their career boxing they
used to call it being punch drunk yes
yes that was the original that was the
original report on CTE uh that was
actually published in 1928 in boxers and
it it described the symptoms that boxers
develop if they stayed in the ring too
long and that was called punch drunk and
then later that uh nomenclature got
changed to dementia pugilistica because
they thought it happened primarily in
pugilists or boxers and then Through The
Years there's slow recognition that it
could happen to individuals who had
other causes of hits to the Head uh and
ultimately like American football
players but uh there was a circus clown
that was would had a lot of hits to the
head that developed CTE so people
started realizing that it's not
exclusive to boxers it's actually anyone
who gets repetitive hits to the Head it
was described in a in an older woman who
was a product of domestic violence and
and that's why they had to sort of make
it a broader term and that was when CTE
was really accepted as a term and
explain simply for someone like me who
doesn't know anything about the
brain how does CTE develop like what's
going on if you is there a way to simp
simply explain it to me yeah well it is
based on the physics of the injury that
acceleration deceleration the stretch of
the brain it causes the brain to be
damaged in the parts of the brain that
get the most stress the most strain so
you could actually they get the most uh
physical displacement that's where you
see the damage to the brain and in it it
almost always in is in the frontal loes
but at the crevices of the brain is
where it starts so we see the earliest
stages that the crevices because those
get the most shearing and it also starts
around blood vessels because the blood
vessels have a certain visco elastic uh
property and then the brain around it
has another and so there's a another
shearing Force around the blood vessels
so the physics of the injury the physics
of the traumatic acceleration
deceleration uh uh determine where the
brain is injured first and that's
crevices and around blood vessels and
that's exactly what you see in stage one
and stage two c G so if I'm constantly
heading the ball mm I'm playing soccer
constantly heading the ball forward like
this yeah my brain is moving forward and
backward and backward and it's it's just
the stretch and and when it stretches
something is happening there is it like
a bruising or the chemical sh up to it's
like a a it's a shearing Force so you
have a tissue that's being stretched the
elements inside the tissue are also
being stretched and they're going to
break there's going to be damage that
caused by this sudden elongation that's
going to snap some of the fibers and and
and and and injure some of the blood
vessels so how many times have I got to
head of football for that to happen I
don't know uh you know we aren't able if
they had accelerometers and in headbands
with soccer players we might know the
answer to that question but obviously we
don't and um so but we do know that you
know years of play in football uh is
associated with risk in fact for every
2.6 years of American football it
doubles your risk for CTE uh there's a
somewhat lower risk uh I I can't
remember the exactly right now the
number of years of uh ice hockey that
you need to play to double your risk for
CTE it's somewhat lower and rugby also
has a dose response relationship and
this really is you know an issue that
does impact soccer and American football
um I was reading about a case of a guy
called Jeff Estel who was a ex England
stri AK he um he was a scorer of a
winning goal in the 1968 FA Cup Final
and he died from CT in 2002 aged 59 so
this is a condition that impacts soccer
players as well and I believe you've met
his family I have met his family yeah
and we also have in our bank uh at least
five professional soccer players uh uh
all of whom have had CTE the Doctor Who
examined Jeff's brain said he couldn't
believe that he was looking at the brain
of a 59-year-old he thought it was the
brain of a
90-year-old um and 10 years before Jeff
died he was struggling with memory loss
forgetfulness depression and anxiety and
obviously once once he'd passed away and
they got to dissect his brain theyve
realized why the resistance you faced
yeah talk talk to me about the the
journey that you've been on to try and
change people's minds because if I was
running the NFL or even the Premier
League or the I don't know what the ice
hockey league is called or um boxing or
the
UFC the news that you're you're telling
me today and the research that you've
done is a threat to me my industry my
business and my profit margins
absolutely yeah so I can imagine people
weren't happy with the message that you
had to share and the research that
you're doing no they weren't and and
also it's America's favorite sport and
it it defines culture football is almost
a religion in the United States you know
people equate football with patriotism
and you know loving the U you know it
has a lot of connotation football
defines communities it defines colleges
and universities so the love of football
is uh is huge I think you know even in
in the in the UK you know you fanatical
fans right it's it's quite something
even beyond the the financial aspects we
all just have these massively strong
feelings about the play of these Sports
and um so coming up and saying you know
the play of these Sports and some people
is damaging their brains and actually
leading to their to their death uh was
was not met with uh any enthusiasm and
so there was a huge effort to really
discredit me and and those were
difficult years uh because my Integrity
uh was was so questioned it's hard to
take it's hard to take people
challenging your your truthfulness and
you know people said I was a fraud and I
was um faking the data and you know all
really it goes on and on the only thing
that kept me going was knowing that I
was speaking for the families and I I
was speaking for them I was their
Advocate and I also knew that this was
blatantly real I could see it under the
microscope it it was obvious to me it's
it's not something that happens normally
it's not something that happens with
aging it's not Alzheimer's disease it's
not uh a benign condition all of those
things were thrown at me many many times
in fact I still hear them today
sometimes and over the years I kept
thinking well if we have enough data in
enough players and we publish in enough
journals and you know have enough uh
science data you know we are grab ually
going to be able to wear this down to
the point where people take it seriously
and we have gotten to that point we are
taken more seriously our CTE is now a
disease that's recognized by the
National Institutes of Health so it's
easier now but if there's still
considerable controversy I also read
that sort of 15 years ago you got a call
from the NFL they contacted you and they
wanted to talk MH why did they contact
you so um our first case was in um uh
February of 2008 that's when I got my
first brain and we announced the
findings in
uh uh later in the year in 2008 over the
next year from 2008 to th 2009 we
accumulated more cases I believe it was
around 10 and uh we had published a
paper we published a paper uh uh of our
experience on CTE so after that paper
was published in September I got a call
from the NFL in November November of
2009 saying that want they wanted me to
come to New York and present my findings
who was in the room the chairmans of the
of this mild TBI committee uh Ira cassen
um and colleagues as well as some uh
owners of teams and how did it go well
it was it fell on deaf ears it was very
it was pretty humiliating it was uh they
didn't believe me they they sort of I
remember one of them said is is there
somebody is there some other doctor that
can address these findings there was
just it was just massive denial and and
and dismissiveness and um you know there
it it felt uh humiliating is the best
word I didn't accomplish much what did
they think it was because if you look at
something like this you know Advanced CT
in this brain that I have in front of me
I mean clearly something is something is
wrong they thought I was misdiagnosing
it something wrong with something else
it wasn't it wasn't related to the play
of football how did you leave that day
feeling very very discouraged feeling
like uh you know
um marginalized
um I'll be honest as a as a woman in
medicine uh you I was one of the earlier
women in medicine you you've you've
experienced being dismissed you've
experienced being talked over you've
experienced having your opinion um
belittled and so it was just sort of a a
a more focused experience of
that but it didn't stop you no it didn't
stop me because the brains kept coming
in you know it's tragedy you see tragedy
after tragedy after tragedy you're going
to keep going and you can see the
evidence I could see the evidence this
is true I just have to convince them
this is true you mentioned the families
a lot yeah well we talk to the families
I do my analysis I then find out you
know what they were like clinically
because the analysis is always done not
knowing anything about their clinical
State I don't know how many head hits
they had how long they played football I
don't know if they were depress I don't
know anything about that so I do it uh
unbiased blinded to the clinical
symptoms but then after I do my analysis
that I talk to the family and um I get
to experience the reaction to it and how
they feel and you know obviously it it
brings up the death it brings up all the
emotions of the of the loved one dying
it's a very often emotional call and um
but it's actually one of the most
rewarding as a physician it's it's it's
one of my most re warning times because
I get I get to I can't heal the living
but I can heal the families that are the
survivors and I can help them um with
the knowledge that is often comforting
to them it explains things the person
didn't hate them they just had brain
damage and they were they were limited
and they they didn't you know their
actions weren't because they they felt U
negatively towards them they just
couldn't control it and and somehow that
that that brings their loved one back to
where they remember them best it brings
them back to the person they were before
the disease started why they married
them it brings their father back to the
father that loved them not the one that
scorned them um and it it explains for
parents why a child might have done
terrible things including maybe uh it
had contributed to an accidental injury
or taking his life and and that
knowledge is very comforting uh it helps
the family heal it's a lot few to carry
yeah it is it is a lot it's very very
very hard year after year to keep on and
there's some days that are darker than
others there's many days where I feel
it's just too much it's too much because
we're not making much progress you know
there hasn't been a lot of acceptance I
mean incrementally we're light years
ahead of where we were 17 years ago but
we're not where I'd like us to be and it
can be very frustrating um but I can't
give up the torch I can't give up the
work um
because who I who will do it who will do
it and and I think at this point we have
the most experience with it we can do it
best was there a a moment where the NFL
started to change their mind because I
read that in 2013 the NFL reached a
$765 million settlement with thousands
of retired players and families affected
by concussion related brain injuries
promising to pay every former player who
Dev brain disease linked to
concussions yes yeah and they paid for
uh CTE before
2015 so anyone who was diagnosed with
CTE 2015 and before got compensated for
CTE but no one after uh they also
compensated for Alzheimer's disease ALS
and Parkinson's disease but they don't
they do not compensate for CTE any
longer anyone who's developed CTE has
has come into the Brand Bank and
diagnose with CTE that is not a
reimbursable condition according to that
settlement why they Dodge they're dod
you know smart lawyers they know how to
dodge a bullet but they still not
getting suit presumably families are
still trying to sue well there's I think
families are but in terms of that
lawsuit that was settled and it was
settled probably too quickly because it
compensated the players who were
suffering at that time but it didn't
compensate future
players the story of Owen Thomas yeah I
was reading that story to can you can
you tell me about the story of Owen
Thomas he's an American football player
at the University of Pennsylvania who
also took his life at a very young age
exactly yeah I mean all of these cases I
remember so well even though it was a
long time ago now um yes Owen Thomas was
uh a upen player um he he had no
concussions that they knew about uh and
he was a apparently an excellent student
but was having some troubles with his
studies was not focusing quite
unexpectedly he took his own life and I
examined that brain and I remember it
was late at night I was uh preparing to
go home but sometimes I like to look at
the cases after the lab is quieted down
to sort of just you know focus and and
and think about things and I remember
looking at his brain and seeing very
clear evidence of CTE and just being you
know you just you're just blown away
you're sort of it's sort of like the air
goes out of you you just sort of can't
believe it he's 21 21 it just seems
insane and I remember talking to his P
parents and his parents were very
surprised they were surprised by his
suicide they hadn't been many warning
signs and they were very surprised that
he had this this disease that they'd
never never heard of and what what was
the cause of that disease in your
opinion his years of playing football
very clearly I've got a American
football helmet over here in the corner
I've never actually seen one before but
um when I was looking at earlier before
we started recording I was shocked by
how thick and heavy it is yeah and I
think that's an older model so I think
they're thicker and heavier now I mean
there's so much padding inside here yeah
yeah I mean they look uh like they're
completely protecting the person but the
but the injury for this disease is
happening inside the helmet and inside
your skull if you think about it the
skull is Nature's helmet and the brain
is Tethered by your spinal cord but it
actually there's some fluid surrounding
it so your brain is moving inside the
skull and no matter how big and thick
and protective that helmet is it's not
changing the movement of your brain
which is a a a a soft substance not
exactly like jello but but it it it
elongates it it it can twist and turn
and that is happening beneath the helmet
beneath the skull what that does what
the helmets were designed for was to
prevent skull fractures and skull
fractures lead to hemorrhages in the
brain bleeds in the brain and sudden
death and that's why a helmet was
developed so people would stop dying on
the American football field ah so
protects the bone but not the brain
exactly yeah so it's pretty useless as
it relates to
CTE right because your brain is still
going to be accelerating and
decelerating
yes
well
okay so I've got some yeah diagrams in
front of me here of the four stages of
CTE and on the left hand side I've got
this stage one where you've got the odd
spot of this sort of brown substance the
brown substance is a substance you use
to sort of I guess highlight the towel
we identify tow it's a it's almost a
chemical reaction if you think about how
you develop a photograph and so it tags
the tow and and and it it's it turns it
brown so we can see it okay so all of
the brown areas are the areas where the
tow has been identified so what I was
wondering is in this stage one there's a
couple of instances and then stage two
there's more and then stage three is
quite drastic shift it's a drastic shift
it's like bigger clusters and then stage
four You've Really Got You know the
whole brain or at least you half of the
brain has been engulfed by this towel
substance right is the difference
between stage one and stage four here
just more hits to the brain or is it if
left alone can it go from stage one to
stage four without further impact it can
go from one to four with aging okay um
so it's a disease of Aging so the older
the player the more like ly they are to
have severe CTE but it's also the number
of years of play so years of exposure
does play into it it's years of exposure
and age of the individual at death that
determines severity okay so if I if I
stopped at stage two if I stopped
playing sports at stage two I stopped
you know wasn't in the military anymore
no domestic violence or anything else
that might cause it it will
progressively get worse even if there's
no further contact yeah okay and we
think that's you know so obviously need
to know why that is and some of the the
theories are there's tremendous
inflammation in the brain uh even a
after just the hits before the towel so
the inflammation May feed the towel
because there's a a linear relationship
between inflammation and towel and once
you have more tow you get more
inflammation so you can see there's sort
of a vicious cycle um but we're looking
into other things why does this disease
become worse with aging because if we
could identify what makes it you know
spread what makes it uh get worse with
with time uh we could you know prevent a
lot of the ultimate um uh
Devastation and in terms of the young
people that you've looked at the brains
you've looked at in young people what
stage do you see in the young people
it's almost all stage one and two okay
except in uh unusual cases like Aaron
Hernandez was 27 when he died um he had
stage three the story of Aon Hernandez
is widely known but for those that don't
know it could you give me a a sum so he
was a a very highlevel high functioning
football player for the New England
Patriots you know from the New England
area which I'm from uh he was given a
$40 million contract and he played you
know with Tom Brady and and Rob
gronowski on the Super Bowl winning
teams and he was really considered a
superstar on the team there was evidence
that he was um having uh some
psychosocial difficulties there were
rumors of criminal activity and he
ultimately um uh was charged with murder
um uh and and went to trial for murder
and then he I believe you know he had
another trial also involving the murder
of of three people charging the
defendant Aaron Hernandez with murder
what say you madam for person guilty of
murder in the first
degree mam forers by which Theory or
theories deliberate premeditation
and or extreme atrocity or
cruelty extreme atrocity or
cruelty he ended up while he was in jail
for the first criminal trial taking his
own life at the age of
27 and um he did donate his brain to my
Center his family did and what did you
see when you looked at his brain he had
a large Brain which is not uncommon for
football players the external surface
looked perfectly normal I mean when I
first saw it I thought he's not going to
have it you know it looks good there was
no obvious uh damage uh but then when we
started doing the
dissection we slice uh through the brain
coronally and uh I could see that his
ventricles the chambers at the inside of
the brain they were dilated they were
larger than they should have been which
means that there's Brin shrinkage of the
brain tissue and then there was a
membrane uh that divides the two halves
of the brain and instead of being a nice
membrane it had giant holes in it those
are called fenestrations and that's a
sign of brain trauma because the fluid
is banging against that curtain and and
ripping it and causing holes and I'd
never seen fenestrations in anyone under
the age of 45 and that actually was a
was a person with CTE that was a rugby
player so that was was shocking to me
and then I I thought when I saw that oh
he's probably is going to have CTE and
then when I looked under the microscope
it was sh it was just shocking it's like
you know you think you've been amazed or
floored by these brains that have come
and and then there's another one and
you're just you know you're just um you
know you're just always uh astonished by
what can happen so his frontal loobe
really his frontal lobe from the back to
the front was really riddled with tow it
was almost a as though he had a
non-functioning frontal lob and and you
know so I can't say that his actions
were related to the CTE that he had in
his brain but it's impossible for me to
conceive that it didn't contribute in
some way you just don't have that
extensive frontal lobe disease without
seeing changes to your behavior and your
decision making will it debilitate his
frontal lobe yeah yeah and what does
that mean so when you when you lose your
frontal lobe you lose your inhibition it
you know your frontal lobe sort of
dampens uh sort of inner urges so uh if
you become very frontal lobe you you
talk without thinking you you don't have
a filter and you do aggressive maybe
impulsive acts with no with no filter
either and and and uh you have poor
judgment you have poor executive
functioning you don't can't focus very
clearly so to me yes many some of his
symptoms uh indicated frontal lobe
damage I looked at the video of Mike
Webster who was a former um NFL Center
one of the greatest I'm told no I'm
talking
about no I'm just trying to find yeah
well traum everybody went through trauma
as a kid I'm not say I was different
than that I'm just
saying the things we do to one
another
okay uh
hell I don't know what I'm saying I'm
just tired and confused right now that's
why I say I I can't really I can't say
it the way I want to say it I could I
could say I could answered this really
easy at other times but right now I'm
just
tired he's clearly struggling oh he's a
mess and and and I think that really for
me brought it to life what do we do
about this about the disease about
everything you've said you know you said
you've done this for 17 years and you
still haven't seen the progress that you
want to see yeah what is the progress
you want to say the progress is taking
hits to the head out of these Sports as
much as is possible and and really a
concerted effort to uh keep these young
athletes safe I think uh team sports
contact sports sports in general are
extremely important to the psychosocial
development of our children I don't want
these Sports to go away but I do want us
to acknowledge that the brain is fragile
that the brain can be very adversely
affected if we don't pay attention to
how many times we're hitting these kids
in the head and that's the bottom line
you cut out the hits to the head you cut
out this disease it's entirely
preventable someone might say but you
know doctor how do we take hits to the
head out of soccer in the NFL it's an
inevitable in rugby we have to be hit in
the the head for the sport to work we
need kids to learn how to head the ball
we need them to learn how to tackle you
know boxing how do we take we can't take
hits out of the head out of boxing the
UFC hugely power slap one of the fastest
growing Sports of the moment have you
seen power slap no it's very simple you
stand at a Podium and someone smashes
you in the in the head with with their
hand huge sport exploding hundreds of
millions of views across the internet
Dana White says it's going to be even
bigger than UFC we can't take hits to
the head out of these Sports surely this
is just wishful thinking well that and
some of these sports are just downright
dangerous and and people are going to
choose to participate in these dangerous
sports but for young children children
in in high school children in or adults
in college um they need to know the
risks and we need to tell them and they
need to be able to ex you know think
that the risks are acceptable and we
need to educate parents and coaches and
the athletes that this can be a
consequence of playing a long career in
these contact Sports we can take the
hits out by changing full contact you
know putting an age um limit when they
can do full contact we could you don't
have to play football all through uh
high school to be a good football player
in college you know you could develop
ball skills and athletic skills without
the head contacts and probably be just
as good a player we've we've turned our
we you know we we just have ignored the
the the clearly risky Behavior that's in
these Sports we could take heading out
of soccer it is football after all you
know it is something you could play
entirely with the foot now that may not
please the fans or the current players
but it's not inconceivable that we could
take heading out of soccer but we'd have
to take it out for everyone uh otherwise
you know people uh people would be
discriminated against who didn't have
the ball ice hockey you can take the
fights out you can certainly uh limit
checking and clearly clearly dangerous
behaviors there but and you can also
monitor the players you could actually
pay attention uh to how many times
they're getting hit we could start
monitoring athletes from beginning of
season to end of season there are ways
to look at the brain uh there's scans
there's other uh neuroses we could be
monitoring these athletes if to see if
they're going down the wrong path if if
things look like they're turning South
uh we right now we're turning a blind
eye to it we're doing nothing hoping
it'll all go away I'll go away and then
there then then none of this will be
real reality but that's not how it works
do you think people want you to go away
I think I think people want all of this
science to go
away if you're an entrepreneur you're
probably going to want to listen to this
it's a message from one of our sponsors
on this podcast which is LinkedIn if
you've listened to me on this podcast
for a while now you'll know that I've
been on a bit of an evolution as a
business owner and entrepreneur and one
of those Evolutions that has become
clearer and clearer as I've matured is
that the single most important thing in
building a business in building a
company is hiring the definition of the
word company is actually group of people
and that is the first responsibility and
job that any entrepreneur has and should
focus on but surprisingly most don't
about 80% of my team have been hired
from LinkedIn and I think there's very
few platforms if any in the world that
could give you that diversity of
candidate with that much information and
data on their profiles it usually costs
money but for the entrepreneurs that are
listening to me I've got you a free job
ad post for your company on LinkedIn
just go to linkedin.com
doac to post your free job ad today
that's linkedin.com doac terms and
conditions apply my last question is
about Alzheimer's you mentioned that
you've looked at lots of brains of
people that have
Alzheimers bit of a dumb question but
what is the difference between
Alzheimer's and Dementia or is it the
same thing yeah that it's a great
question because everybody is confused
so dementia is sort of this general term
it's dementia which means the loss of
your mental abilities you know
deating so loss of cognition cognitive
abilities is dementia there are many
subcategories of dementia causes of
dementia the most common cause of
dementia is Alzheimer disease it's the
most common age related cause of
dementia but then under Alzheimer's
there's also Parkinson's disease with
Louis Body Disease there's something
called frontotemporal lowbar
degeneration then there's you know you
get into otter and rarer diseases
Progressive sual nuclear paly uh uh
ganian dementia and and somewhere down
there is also CTE so CTE is a cause of
dementia ah okay and how do I
avoid getting
Alzheimer well you know
you know it's a very common disease it's
supposedly in over 50% of in people that
live to the age of 85 if you looked at
their brains half of them would have
Alzheimer's disease not everyone gets
the symptoms of Alzheimer's disease at
85 but they'd have the pathology now
things you can do to uh lessen the
symptoms of Alzheimer's disease are you
know staying socially connected using
your brain challenging your brain
because High cognitive Reserve High
cognitive ability uh gives you uh
strength brain strength brain resilience
against these diseases so even if you
have pathology you can circumvent the
areas of injury the areas that aren't
working well and and no and not
experience the symptoms so that's one
thing you know physical activity Fitness
but also mental Fitness challenging your
brain keeping an active uh developing a
high cognitive Reserve um and then the
other things you can do is you know stay
fit Eat Right cardiovascular health is
int intimately connected to Alzheimer's
disease you want to avoid high blood
sugar diabetes because that can
definitely hasten Alzheimer's disease so
it's really a story of staying healthy
alcohol well alcohol can damage your
brain and alcohol damages it in entirely
different ways than Alzheimer's or CTE
but it if you if you do drink alcohol it
can exag acerbate your symptoms it can
make your symptoms worse and um you know
we don't have any direct connection
between alcohol and Alzheimer's but uh
you know we do know that it's not good
for your brain health it damages parts
of the brain that can lead to cognitive
problems are these diseases increasing
no I think our awareness of these
diseases is increasing you know how we
used to call it scile dementia like oh
yeah he's just getting old so you know
we sort of dismissed it as just old age
but there are some people that live to
very old ages that are perfectly intact
um so these are abnormal aging these are
pathological aging um and we're much
more aware of it than we were say 40
years ago 40 years ago we really had no
concept how common this disease was is
there anything that you believe about
the brain that most people disagree with
still to this day I don't I can't think
so as it relates to Alzheimer's and CTE
is there any sort of fundamental beliefs
that you're currently trying to prove
out through your testing and the things
you're doing at Boston
University well I do I I I I you know I
have my own theories I don't know if
other people don't believe them but I do
feel that inflammation anything that
causes inflammation in your brain and I
think what a lot of people would agree
with me the inflammation is one of the
key promoters of uh brain disease and
nerd degeneration so there's tremendous
inflammation in Alzheimer's disease
tremendous inflammation in CTE uh and if
we could figure out sort of this bad uh
inflammation we we might be able to
prevent or at least Stave off these
terrible diseases and the other thing
that I think is very important um is
small vessel disease vascular disease
the the health of these small blood
vessels that are so important to in
terms of giving Ox oxygenating our brain
if they become uh damaged or injured
through a variety of mechanisms then we
also see these diseases uh being
accelerated so uh you know I think there
needs to be a lot more attention to the
earliest changes that are associated
with these diseases and in my mind those
are vascular changes and inflammation
and what kinds of things cause
inflammation in the brain really any
insult to the brain uh certainly if the
blood vessels are damaged and they
become leaky you get substances leaking
into the brain that irritate the brain
and cause tremendous tremendous
inflammation the brain the bloodb brain
barrier is a very tight barrier you can
have all sorts of toxins in your blood
but they're not getting into your brain
because you have such a tight barrier
between the blood and and the Brain we
keep out all sorts of noxious substances
but if you injure the blood vessels they
the they leak and all those things that
we are you know trying to keep out of
our brain leak into the brain and
promote inflammation those changes can
facilitate neurod degeneration and the
things that make those blood vessels
become injured well trauma trauma that
back and forth but also uh things that
affect uh vascular Health like high
blood pressure high cholesterol blood
sugar exactly High cortisol yeah yeah
lead to so stress I guess stress you
want to reduce stress you want to stay
physically fit you want to eat right
it's it's we all know that what you need
to do it's just the things that sleep
you know sleep is so important for uh
because at the end of the day sleep
you're actually clearing bad substances
out of your brain you have a clearance
system in your brain that is most active
when you sleep and so when you're
sleeping it's pulling out the noxious
chemicals it's draining them into your
into your system so you can get rid of
them so sleep is also critically
important we probably have a few million
parents listening at the moment to this
conversation and those parents you know
they their kids are saying I want to
play rugby I want to play soccer I want
to play American football I want to do
hockey I all these kinds of things what
would you say to to those parents well
you know every parent is different every
child's different you have to really
understand your child is it is it that
they need to play that particular sport
or could they be as just as easily uh uh
H you know could they be just as happy
in a non-contact sport there plenty of
non-con sport they plenty of sports that
have low risk so I would promote all of
those and then if they're playing they
choose if they think you know this is a
decision that they want to make despite
the risks then you know make sure the
coach is very very well you know versed
in in some of the adverse consequences
of concussions and and those hits to the
Head the even the non-concussive hits
make sure that there's good education
good education uh of the player as well
as the teammates as well as the coach
and then you know try to delay playing
full contact as long as possible I think
you should delay it until the person's
physically robust has M with a
musculature with a strong neck they're
able to you know resist hits hits
there's you know a blindsided hit is
much more damaging than a hit that
you're expecting because you set your
your neck you you You're Expecting The
Hit and it doesn't cause the Whiplash
that that a blindsided hit caused and
what if the owner of the NFL is
listening right now the the chairman of
the NFL the person that's in charge of
these sort of leagues around the world
because I do know because I speak to
some of them that there are people at
some of the biggest sports teams in the
world that listen that are in charge of
player performance and I actually had a
meeting a couple of weeks ago with um
someone who's at one of the biggest
teams in the world who's in charge of
player wellbeing um and they listen
frequently to the podcast and talk to me
about the episode so what would you say
to those individuals that have the power
to make change I'd say do more about the
non-concussive hits there's been a lot
of awareness of concussion a lot of
awareness of concussion management
but the important hits are the hits that
don't cause symptoms are not considered
concussion find ways to limit the am
number of hits to the head in the sport
take hits out of practice uh encourage
players to start full contact later lead
by example show that the subconcussive
non-concussive hits are something to be
limited and show
leadership by by showing that you're
addressing these non-concussive hits
effectively we have a closing tradition
on the podcast where the last guest
leaves a question for the next guest oh
not knowing who they're leaving it for
oh my goodness and we'll ask you to do
the same can you take me to Your Darkest
Day what happened and what made it so
dark well My Darkest Day probably many
days um is when I I don't have a
complete confidence in myself and I
doubt myself and I and I uh I I I don't
want to go forward because I think I'm
not capable
and the contrary of that is that this
work came about because I believed in
myself I believed I was seeing the truth
I believed it was true and actual and it
wouldn't have happened if I'd let my
doubts and myself limit me so I would
say to the answer to that question is
believe in yourself and take it to where
it needs to
go thank you so much you're a
Pioneer and you've started a
conversation over the last decade or so
that has really had a huge impact on the
world and people's opinion about a
subject matter that before then was so
invisible to many the research you've
done and continue to do are going to
save a lot of people's lives that you're
never going to get to meet not just save
their lives but
extend their health span and make their
lives more joyous not just their life as
well but also the lives of their family
so I know I can imagine it feels very
frustrating when you're staring at
reality and Truth every single day but
then you're looking into a world that
can't see or appreciate the same truth
that you
see but it's important that you know
that it matters thank you I appreciate
that and how can the people listening
help well they can pay attention to
their own brain health they can promote
brain health and if they know of someone
who's struggling bring it to uh
attention bring it to a medical
professional's attention and if someone
were to very unfortunately die uh of
course brain donation is has been
absolutely critical to our understanding
these diseases not just CTE but
Alzheimer's disease Parkinson's disease
make a brain donation it's a legacy that
will continue to go forward uh many
years after your death I shall be
donating my brain Dr an Mickey thank you
so much thank
you every single time you eat you have
an opportunity to improve your health
that's why I love Zoe because it helps
me to make the smartest food choices for
my body as you guys probably know Zoe is
a sponsor of my podcast I'm also an
investor in the company which is
important to say I invested in the
company because Zoe combines My Health
Data with their worldclass science using
these two things Zoe guides me to Better
Health every single time I make a food
choice and eat which means I have more
energy better sleep better mood and I'm
less hungry and the best part about Zoe
is that it's backed by their recent
clinical trial something called the
method study which is the gold standard
of scientific research I started Zoe
just over a year ago now and I've been
able to track my progress week after
week so I can learn how to be even
smarter the week after and if you
haven't joined Zoe yet I'm going to give
you 10% off when you joined zoee today
just use the code Steven 10 at checkout
so many of you have asked me for a
bloody code for Zoe and here is your
opportunity Steven 10 at checkout there
may not be enough another one
[Music]